Jehovah cherishes all who serve him loyally,
regardless of their circumstances.
Do you truly understand
why Jehovah loves those
whose situation in life
may be very different from your own?
If so, you are in a much better position
to show them your love and support.
Please listen closely
as Brother William Malenfant,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
begins this symposium with the talk
“Successful Fighters for the Faith
—Those With Unbelieving Mates.”
Each speaker will then introduce
the one to follow.
Brother Malenfant, you have our attention.
Jehovah God’s inspired Word
makes this significant declaration
at Titus 2:11.
It reads:
“For the undeserved kindness of God
has been manifested,
“bringing salvation
to all sorts of people.”
Yes, “to all sorts of people”
—this was true in the first century,
and it’s true today more than ever before.
We are a worldwide brotherhood
made up of “all sorts of people”
who have come to a knowledge of the truth,
and we have made the decision
to serve Jehovah.
In this symposium,
we will discuss three sorts of people:
first, those whose mates
are not yet Jehovah’s Witnesses;
second, those who are being raised
by one believing parent or relative;
and third, those who are single.
Many brothers and sisters
who find themselves in these situations
are successfully putting up
“a hard fight for the faith,”
as stated in Jude 3.
And all of them are valuable assets
to the congregation.
So as we discuss each situation
during this symposium,
please focus your attention
on those who are in the congregation
that you attend
and ask yourself,
‘How can I show my appreciation
for brothers and sisters
who have these circumstances?’
And ask yourself,
‘If I am in one of the situations
being discussed,
‘what will help me to continue
to fight successfully for the faith?’
This talk will focus
on Christians with unbelieving mates.
For a well-known example,
we look back to the first century
to a woman named Eunice,
the mother of Timothy.
She is referred to at Acts 16:1,
which says that Timothy was
“the son of a believing Jewish woman
but of a Greek father.”
So it refers to Eunice as a believing woman,
but it does not refer to Timothy’s father
as a believing man.
The point is that Timothy’s father
was not a Christian.
Nevertheless, Eunice, his mother,
along with Lois, his grandmother,
taught Timothy the holy writings
—the truth as found in God’s Word.
When we speak of unbelieving mates,
we recognize that their circumstances
are not all the same.
Some non-Witness mates oppose true worship.
Others are indifferent.
And others may be tolerant,
even somewhat interested and supportive,
but they may not be progressing
toward baptism.
Some mates of believers are baptized,
but they have weakened spiritually.
They may no longer be regular at meetings,
go in service,
or participate in family worship.
And last of all, sad to say,
some mates are disfellowshipped.
But we never give up on unbelieving mates,
and we always hope
that any who are disfellowshipped
will come to their senses, repent,
and return to Jehovah.
Is there something that we as publishers
in the congregation can do
to show appreciation for fellow believers
whose mates are not yet serving Jehovah?
Yes, there is,
and the apostle Paul tells us
at Philippians 3:17
that we can learn from their good example
and imitate them.
Philippians 3:17 says:
“Unitedly become imitators of me, brothers,
“and keep your eye on those
who are walking in a way
that is in harmony
with the example we set for you.”
So Paul tells us
to look closely at his example
and the fine example of others
in the congregation.
Among those setting a fine example
are brothers and sisters
who have unbelieving mates.
They have worked hard to maintain
a strong relationship with Jehovah.
They have cultivated self-discipline
to keep a good schedule
of theocratic activities.
And many have become proficient in balancing
family obligations with spiritual pursuits.
It’s not easy, but they are doing it.
So how should we view them and treat them?
We do what Philippians 2:4 tells us to do.
We “look out
not only for [our] own interests,
but also for the interests of others.”
That means that we show concern
for their well-being.
We treat them with respect.
We certainly do not ignore them.
We recognize that as spiritual people,
they have much to offer.
Isn’t it wonderful that we are family
and we belong to one another?
We take brothers and sisters who have
unbelieving mates into account,
and we look out for their interests
as the scripture states
because we love them
and we see their good qualities.
So, what can we do?
Whenever possible,
we should include them in our activities.
But what else can we do?
We can show interest in their mates
and try to help them spiritually.
For example, if circumstances allow,
invite them with their mates
for a meal or to a gathering.
You know that friendliness
and upbuilding conversation
can have a powerful effect
on a person’s heart.
As you watch the following video,
think about how you can show appreciation
for any in your congregation
whose mates
are not presently serving Jehovah.
It was when my husband was really opposed.
One night, he put a knife to his stomach
and said,
“Will you choose me or the truth?”
My husband was cooperative.
He would wave goodbye
as we went to the meetings,
but he wasn’t interested at all.
I felt really jealous
when I saw families
sitting together at assemblies.
Because of work
and taking care of his mother,
my husband gradually started missing
meetings.
Some in our congregation,
with good intentions,
pointed it out to him.
But the way they did this
made him feel misunderstood
and discouraged,
and he put the Bible
and the publications away.
I also had times when I wanted
to drift away with him.
I was really happy when I learned the truth.
In my zeal, I bombarded my husband
with information,
and that made him worry
that I had turned into a fanatic.
I think he was genuinely concerned
for his family
and thought that I had joined
a weird religion.
One family in the congregation
often invited us to meals
and outdoor activities.
I think my husband appreciated
those small acts of kindness.
I also tried to show that I appreciated him
through my speech and conduct.
When my children and I applied
what we learned in our lives,
I think he gradually became interested
in the truth.
The words “safeguard your heart”
caught my eye.
I decided to try and keep my heart
and my children’s hearts
toward Jehovah.
When I went out in the ministry
with my children,
I would point out various aspects
of God’s creation around us.
And before my husband
would come home from work,
I made it a habit to teach them God’s Word.
I made a conscious effort
to see myself in Paradise with my husband.
This strengthened my resolve
to never leave the truth.
I wrote caring notes to my husband
when I went to the meetings.
I was convinced
that he would come back one day,
and he did come back.
I did not leave Jehovah,
and so Jehovah never abandoned me.
My husband never embraced the truth.
However, right now all five
of my children are in the truth,
and I feel really blessed.
Being able to serve Jehovah as a family
along with my husband
—the joy and appreciation
just keep welling up.
What did we learn from the video?
We learned that believing mates
who display fine Christian qualities
can have a positive influence on mates
who are not yet serving Jehovah.
So, what will help you
to keep on fighting for the faith?
Wisdom and strength
that only Jehovah can provide.
Remember, his power is unlimited
and he finds pleasure in showing favor
to those who trust in him.
Also, you know that he loves you
and that he listens to sincere prayers
from those who want to do things his way.
The combination of God’s love,
prayer, and his spirit
can give you the strength
and the wisdom you need
to maintain a balanced routine
of spiritual activities
while making sure to care
for your family responsibilities.
In the video, the believing mates
took advantage
of all the spiritual food that was available
to build themselves up.
And Jehovah helped them to display
the spiritual qualities of patience and tact.
You know as well as I do that at times
we may not be as tactful as we should be.
Being patient and tactful is not always easy,
especially when you’re tired
and feel disappointed
by your mate’s words or actions.
And yet, regardless of your situation,
Jehovah can supply you with the power
to keep setting a fine example
as you keep on praying
that your mate will eventually respond
to the truth.
At 1 Peter 3:1, 2
—1 Peter 3:1, 2—
we find this very wise and practical counsel.
First Peter 3:1, 2 reads:
“In the same way,
“you wives, be in subjection
to your husbands,
“so that if any are not obedient to the word,
“they may be won without a word
“through the conduct of their wives,
“because of having been eyewitnesses
“of your chaste conduct
together with deep respect.”
Isn’t that wonderful?
The counsel that Peter gives
is tested and true.
Its application has helped
an untold number of unbelieving mates
to accept the truth.
And when you think about it,
it is truly amazing
how deep respect and fine conduct
can win over an unbelieving mate
without a word being spoken.
Of course, as you work
what is good toward your mate,
there undoubtedly will be opportunities
to speak about the truth
and provide spiritual assistance
when circumstances permit
and it seems appropriate.
So keep on setting a fine example
and praying that your mate
will respond to the truth.
Have faith in the inspired words
that Paul wrote
at 1 Corinthians 7:16
—1 Corinthians 7:16—
and remember to continue to show
a positive attitude toward your mate.
First Corinthians 7:16 poses two questions
but with a positive slant.
Chapter 7 and verse 16 reads:
“For wife, how do you know
“whether you will save your husband?
“Or, husband, how do you know
whether you will save your wife?”
Yes, this text is telling us
to remain positive
about the possibility
of a mate taking the truth.
And it is a fact
that many unbelieving mates
have accepted the truth
because of observing a husband or a wife
who follows God’s direction.
Therefore, we continue to hope wholeheartedly
that in time unbelieving mates
will respond to the truth
and find pleasure in serving Jehovah.
As you apply divine counsel from God’s Word,
be assured that with Jehovah’s help,
you can continue to be
a successful fighter for the faith
and bring honor to Jehovah God.
Brother Seth Hyatt,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will consider the next talk,
“Successful Fighters for the Faith
—Those Being Raised by Single Parents.”
At Psalm 68:5,
Jehovah is called
“a father of the fatherless.”
Are you a fatherless child?
Or do you have a fatherless child
or fatherless children in your congregation?
You may be wondering,
‘What do we mean by fatherless child?’
Well, in the context of our discussion,
we’re talking about young people
who have only one believing parent
—one parent in the truth.
Now, that allows
for a spectrum of possibilities:
It could be a single-parent family;
it could be a religiously divided family,
and especially when the unbeliever
is opposed;
it could even include a situation
where only one parent
is actively serving Jehovah.
I was five years old when my mother
learned the truth from the Bible.
For some years,
I lived in a religiously divided home.
And eventually,
my mother became a single parent,
and we dealt with those circumstances.
There are many of us here at Bethel
or in the field pioneering,
serving as missionaries,
circuit overseers,
construction workers
—many of us who
have experienced similar circumstances.
Interestingly, in the Bible,
Jehovah saw fit to include
the life experience of a young man
who grew up
in a religiously divided home
—Timothy.
The Bible describes him as having
‘a believing Jewish mother
but a Greek father.’
He had only one parent who served Jehovah.
And we know that his mother, Eunice,
and his grandmother Lois
were instrumental in helping him
become well-founded in the truth.
But the Scriptures indicate
that others had a share
in his spiritual advancement as well.
And that’s where all of us
come into this conversation.
All of us, like Jehovah,
need to appreciate the fatherless children
in our congregations.
We should view them as modern-day Timothys.
How do we do that?
Well, we can learn a lot
from the apostle Paul.
Late in the year 49 or early 50 C.E.,
the apostle Paul,
on his second missionary journey,
visited the city of Lystra
and there he observed Timothy
—and not just in a casual way.
Paul really saw Timothy.
He observed his potential,
and he took the initiative
to provide training
so that Timothy could realize that potential.
That’s a beautiful example for us.
We need to take note of
and encourage
the fatherless children in our midst.
The apostle Paul set a nice example
in something that he wrote to Timothy.
In the year 65 C.E.,
Paul was a prisoner in Rome
with no prospect of being released.
In fact, his death was imminent
—time to write one more letter.
To whom did he write?
To Timothy
—his beloved “child in the faith.”
And what did he have to say to Timothy
in this last inspired letter?
Let’s read it together,
2 Timothy chapter 1,
2 Timothy 1:5:
“For I recall your unhypocritical faith,
“which dwelled first in your grandmother Lois
“and your mother Eunice,
but which I am confident is also in you.”
Did you notice what Paul did?
In just a few words,
he commended and expressed confidence
in Timothy
and he also commended Timothy’s mother
and grandmother
—didn’t he?—
for their “unhypocritical faith.”
For Lois and Eunice,
serving Jehovah was not playacting.
Their faith was genuine.
What a blessing for Timothy
that proved to be!
Well, in a similar way,
we can offer
specific, sincere, heartfelt commendation
to fatherless children
and their parents
and commend them
for what they’re able to do.
Include them
in spiritual and recreational activities.
When I was a boy,
my grandmother used to pick me up
every Saturday morning
and take me in the ministry.
I never had to wonder if she was coming,
and I never had to wonder
who I would work with.
The book study conductor, an older brother,
would always include my grandmother and me
in the group with him and his wife.
I cherish those memories.
Pay close attention now
as some who grew up
in single-parent homes
explain how they were encouraged
to be successful fighters for the faith.
It felt like a bad dream.
Our family was really zealous in the truth.
We were playing downstairs one day,
and Mom came down to tell us
she was leaving Jehovah and leaving Dad.
Saying goodbye to Mom,
that was the hardest day of my life.
My mother and father became inactive
when I was about four years old.
My father was never really around.
When my mom started to learn the truth,
my dad said she was forbidden from studying.
If we were to go to the meetings,
he would take us out forcibly.
He became verbally and physically abusive
to my mom.
My parents’ breakup was very tough.
It was a struggle for my mother
to raise two boys on her own.
She would work two or three jobs,
and serving Jehovah just took a backseat.
When my parents divorced,
my mom was very depressed.
She did the best she could,
but Jehovah didn’t intend for mothers
to fill both roles
as parents.
My sisters and I,
we made a conscious choice
that we weren’t going to make
the same bad choices that Mom did.
We realized that it was up to us.
So I dedicated my life to Jehovah
and was baptized when I was 15.
We thrived spiritually
when we didn’t have the opposition from Dad.
Now we could go out in service,
go to the meetings freely.
We didn’t have to hide our literature
for fear he would rip them up.
When I was around 15 years old,
my mother took us to the meeting,
and she was determined
that this was going to be her last meeting.
It was the night of a local needs part.
It was the right time.
Jehovah just opened my mother’s heart wide.
After that experience,
it was like she was a new woman.
My sisters and I have always been a team.
We pioneered together; we moved to Cambodia
to serve as need-greaters together.
They’re both in special full-time service
with their husbands in Cambodia,
and I’ve been serving here in Myanmar Bethel,
along with my husband,
for just over 11 years now.
My mom set a stellar example
for me to follow.
Her relationship with Jehovah
was always above everything else.
It was her example that helped me
to set and reach spiritual goals.
I started pioneering
during my senior year of high school.
In nearly 20 years of full-time service,
I’ve spent most of that time
at Brooklyn Bethel and Warwick with my wife.
My mother had a very strong influence
on my theocratic goals.
My wife and I had the privilege of attending
the first School for Kingdom Evangelizers,
and currently we’re serving
in the circuit work.
No one needs to be defined
by their negative circumstances.
First Peter 5:10 says:
‘God himself will complete your training.’
It might be tough at times,
but with Jehovah’s help, you can succeed.
It reminds me of what David said
in the 27th Psalm and verse 10;
he said: “Even if my . . . father [or] mother
abandon me,
Jehovah . . . will take me in.”
That was definitely the case
in my situation.
Jehovah doesn’t define us
by our upbringing or our past.
He sees our potential.
So it’s up to us.
With Jehovah,
we can be anything we want to be.
Well, we appreciate
those beautiful expressions.
So those of you who are fatherless children,
how do you see yourself?
Do you see yourself as Jehovah sees you,
as a unique individual with potential?
Certainly, you’re not inferior in any way
because of your circumstances.
Did you appreciate the comments
made by those in the video?
Your circumstances don’t have to define you.
Negative circumstances and upbringing
do not have to define you.
We would add this:
Your unique experience in life
gives you a unique perspective,
and Jehovah may be able
to use you to help others.
So be a Timothy.
At a young age, relatively speaking,
Timothy was a spiritual man
and entrusted with responsibility.
The apostle Paul described him
as having a disposition like no one else’s.
Timothy cared for others.
You can do the same.
Reach out!
Be a pioneer, a Bethelite,
a field missionary, a construction worker,
a circuit overseer.
You young brothers,
qualify and reach out
to be a ministerial servant
and then an elder.
The opportunities are endless.
Allow Jehovah to use you,
and continue to cultivate appreciation
for your loyal parent.
I know I appreciate my mother very much
for her fine example of faith
through a number
of very trying circumstances.
We don’t take the faithfulness
of our single parents
for granted.
Well, in conclusion,
we want to assure you
that you can be
a successful fighter for the faith,
just as Timothy was.
We have confidence in you,
and we pray Jehovah’s continued rich blessing
on your service to him.
Brother Joel Dellinger,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will consider the final talk
of this symposium,
“Successful Fighters for the Faith
—Single Christians.”
In this symposium, we’ve been reminded
that Jehovah cherishes and empowers
those who serve him loyally.
In this concluding part of the symposium,
we’ll focus on single brothers and sisters.
Let’s answer three questions:
First, how do we know
that married and single Christians
all  have an honored place
in the congregation?
Second, how can we show
that we value and support
our fellow believers who are not married?
And third, if you’re single,
how can you be
a successful fighter for the faith?
To begin,
let’s briefly consider Jehovah’s view
of married and single Christians.
One thing we love
about our God is that Jehovah is not partial.
Regardless of a person’s
nationality or skin color,
anyone who wishes can serve him acceptably.
Jehovah’s impartiality also means
that he does not favor
married or single Christians,
one over the other.
Really, remaining single
or getting married is a personal choice.
And nowhere does the Bible
state that our value to Jehovah
is linked to being either single or married.
For example, at Matthew 19:12,
Jesus said that some of his followers
would choose to remain single
“on account of the Kingdom.”
He then went on to say:
“Let the one who can
make room for it make room for it.”
Now, think about that for a moment.
If a Christian, younger or older,
chooses to remain single
for the sake of the Kingdom,
Jehovah and Jesus respect such a decision
and they appreciate the good motive
behind that personal choice.
Other Christians are unmarried
because of circumstances in life.
For example, some faithful Christians
in the congregation are too young to marry.
Others have lost a mate
because of death or divorce.
The apostle Paul
maintained God’s impartial view
of both single and married Christians.
Like Jesus,
Paul did not teach that Christians
should marry or that they
should remain single.
In commenting on Paul’s
first inspired letter to the Corinthians,
The Watchtower  back in 2012 said this:
“Really, both [marriage and singleness]
“can be described as gifts from God.
Jehovah does not view
[singleness] as a cause for shame or grief.”
Singleness may bring
a Christian certain advantages.
An unmarried Christian who is not
weighed down with family responsibilities
may have more time and energy
to devote to God’s service
than a married Christian.
Of course, single Christians
do not view themselves
as better than married
Christians for this reason.
The Bible’s message
—Jehovah’s thinking—is clear, isn’t it?
Married and single Christians
all can have an honored
place in the congregation.
Now let’s consider our second question:
How can we who are married
show that we value
and support fellow believers
who are not married?
Please open your Bible
with me to 1 Corinthians chapter 12,
and notice verse 25.
In the context,
we notice that Paul is emphasizing
that in the Christian congregation,
we need one another.
We depend on one another.
Just as we need all
the parts of our literal body
—our eyes, our hands, and our feet—
all Christians, single and married,
are valued and needed.
So how can we show that we appreciate
our single brothers and sisters?
Let’s read verse 25:
“. . . so that there should be
no division in the body,”
and here’s the point,
“but its members should have
mutual concern for one another.”
The study edition of the New World
Translation  says that this expression,
“have mutual concern for one another,”
could also be rendered
as “be anxious over one another.”
Well, the lesson is clear:
Married Christians,
we show appreciation
for single brothers and sisters
when we show concern for their welfare,
whether that’s spiritually or physically.
We do not ignore them;
we don’t look down on them;
nor do we treat them as if we
have very little in common with them.
In this regard, the apostle Paul
set an example worthy of imitation.
He was keenly interested
in Timothy’s spiritual health and progress.
Though single,
Paul saw potential in Timothy
and invested in that spiritual man.
And what happened as a result?
An inexperienced, young, single Christian
became an excellent overseer.
And when the two of them, Paul and Timothy,
were no longer traveling together,
Paul continued to show
genuine interest in Timothy’s welfare.
We know that because he wrote two letters
that Jehovah has preserved
for our benefit in the Holy Scriptures.
Now, can you imagine
how Timothy must have felt
to have received a letter
from his older friend Paul?
For just a moment,
let’s put ourselves in Timothy’s sandals
as we listen to just a few lines
from Paul’s first letter.
“To Timothy, a genuine child in the faith:
“May you have undeserved kindness
and mercy and peace
from God the Father
and Christ Jesus our Lord.”
A little later in the letter,
Timothy would have read this:
“This instruction I entrust to you,
my child Timothy,
“in harmony with the prophecies
that were made about you,
that by these you may
go on waging the fine warfare.”
Then there was this encouragement:
“Do not neglect the gift in you
“that was given you through a prophecy
when the body of elders
laid their hands on you.”
Do you think those
words of encouragement reassured Timothy
and made him feel appreciated?
Without a doubt.
In the same letter,
Paul went on to express concern
about Timothy’s “frequent cases of sickness.”
Paul’s concern for Timothy’s welfare,
his spiritual and physical welfare,
no doubt touched
Timothy’s heart and encouraged him
to move forward in Jehovah’s service.
And Paul’s example touches our heart as well.
We may be moved to ask ourselves:
‘Is there more I can do
‘to look out for the needs of single ones
‘who are exerting
themselves in God’s service?
‘Do I wrongly view single ones as incomplete,
‘inferior, or lacking,
or do I show them honor?’
As a traveling overseer,
Timothy was a success.
Paul did not look down on him.
Rather, Paul chose Timothy,
a single Christian,
for weighty assignments
and gave him the training he needed
in order to succeed.
Today, I’m sure you
and I can think of many practical ways
that we can demonstrate
our concern for the welfare
of our fellow believers who are unmarried.
The August 2020 issue of The Watchtower
provided this reminder in a study article:
“We do well to keep in mind
“that some single Christians have made it
a personal goal to remain unmarried.
“Other . . . Christians would like to marry,
“but they simply
have not found the right person.
“Still others may
have lost their mate in death.
“In any case,
should those in the congregation
“feel the need to ask
single Christians why they are not married
or to offer [help to] find a mate?”
When we reason on Jehovah’s thinking
as found in the Scriptures,
we know the answer to that question.
We do not  need to ask single ones
when they are getting married;
nor do we need to pair them up
with other single ones
if they have not requested our help.
Instead, we should look for ways
to commend them
for their fine example and assure them
that we love and appreciate them.
In the following dramatization,
please note what an elder learned
about the challenges faced by single ones.
Brothers, it’s hard to believe
this is our last time together.
Wow!
We have a packed agenda,
so let’s get started.
Our first point . . .
This is our last week
with our circuit overseer
before he leaves us
for his new circuit assignment.
Rick has been a great circuit overseer
—spiritually mature, experienced,
and patient with us.
Tom, your thought?
Well, the brothers and sisters . . .
Rick is single.
And sadly, there were plenty of times
we turned that gift into a challenge
—ever since his first visit.
Hello, Jeff.
Yeah, I have a minute.
Oh, that.
Laundry night.
My washing machine is a clunker.
I just assumed a single brother
had lots of free time.
I didn’t know how much he had to do
on his own.
But there was a lot more I didn’t understand.
See you. Bye!
Bye.
Hey, look!
They have something there.
It sounds like a great Bible study.
I can’t wait to meet her.
Thank you very much.
See you then.
See you.
They would be really good . . .
I don’t know what you’re waiting for.
For what?
Come on!
A single circuit overseer, a pioneer sister
—you’ve got to be looking for a C.O.’s wife.
Well, . . .
The teasing was so inappropriate
and was there at every visit.
Then there were those trying to be,
how should I say, helpful.
Look!
You’ll want to meet them,
and so I invited them for lunch Saturday.
Rick never asked for that help.
All it did was put him
and plenty of sisters
in an awkward situation.
That’s what he dealt with week after week.
We all failed at times
to see past the single person
to the spiritual man giving Jehovah his best.
We’ll miss you.
Just maybe not as much
as some of the sisters.
I didn’t want to make that mistake again
with any single brother or sister.
Rick.
Jeff.
Thank you.
I learned a lot from you.
And I hope Jehovah blesses you
wherever you go.
Amen!
Thanks, Rick.
Let’s now consider our final point:
If you’re single,
you too can be powerful by faith.
But how?
A great help in building faith
is by setting and reaching spiritual goals.
Of Abraham, Romans 4:20 says:
“Because of the promise of God,
he did not waver in a lack of faith.”
Like Abraham, we encourage you
single brothers and sisters
to frequently meditate on God’s promises.
Thinking often about how Jehovah
has kept every promise to us in the past
and how he’s keeping his promises now
surely encourages us to remember
that he will keep every promise
that he has made for our future.
Doing so strengthens our faith.
Like Jesus, like Paul, like Timothy,
talk about Jehovah’s promises with others
by zealously sharing in the field ministry.
And, please, do not isolate yourself
from others in the congregation,
thinking that you have
very little to contribute.
No, you have much to contribute
as a faithful brother or sister
in the Christian congregation.
We warmly encourage you to reach out
and associate with spiritually mature ones
in your congregation,
whether single or married.
Like Timothy, “ponder over these things;
“be absorbed in [spiritual pursuits],
so that your advancement
may be plainly [manifest to] all.”
Remember, you are needed and loved.
Well, what have all of us
learned in this faith-strengthening
and encouraging symposium?
Please open your Bible
with me to Hebrews chapter 11.
Starting in verse 4, you’ll notice,
as you scan the verses,
that many familiar names of men
and women of faith are outlined for us.
There’s Abel and Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, Sarah,
Rahab, Gideon, and David, and many more.
All of these men and women
had different circumstances in life.
It’s true.
But what did they all have in common?
Notice Hebrews 11:34.
In the middle of the verse, it tells us
they “were made powerful.”
Yes, they “were made powerful” by faith.
And the same is happening today
in every congregation
of Jehovah’s people earth wide.
Young ones, older ones, men and women
—regardless of our family circumstances—
all of us are being made powerful by faith.
So, dear brothers and sisters,
please be assured that we love you
and appreciate you.
And may Jehovah bless your efforts
to be a successful fighter for the faith.
Thank you, brothers, for those loving talks.
The time has now arrived
for the baptism discourse.
We invite all baptism candidates
to pay particular attention.
In the days ahead,
how can you further strengthen your faith?
Why can you be confident
that Jehovah will reward your faith?
Listen closely to the answers presented
in the discourse entitled
“Exercising Faith Means Everlasting Life!”
The talk will be given
by Brother John Ekrann,
a helper to the Coordinators’ Committee.
All of us around the world
rejoice with you baptismal candidates.
This is a very special occasion for you.
Today, you will join millions
of your brothers and sisters
in a very special relationship with Jehovah.
I want you to imagine for a moment
that you’re in a very large stadium
and there are eight and a half million
of your brothers and sisters
all in this stadium clapping and so happy
to see the stand
you’re taking for Jehovah today.
Some of you are young ones
that are raised in the truth,
and you’re sitting
with your parents and family.
Others of you may have known
the truth years ago
and have recently returned to Jehovah.
Others may have learned the truth recently
and, even under these unusual circumstances
of a pandemic and Zoom meetings,
have come to the point
of dedicating your life to Jehovah.
Whatever your circumstances,
we are so happy that you’ve made
the decision to get baptized.
Now, the theme of our talk
with you baptism candidates
is “Exercising Faith Means Everlasting Life!”
There are two key words here:
exercising and faith.
Faith is your trust and confidence
in Jehovah and his promises.
And exercising your faith
is living your life to do God’s will.
You’ve shown your faith
by working hard to qualify for baptism today.
Now, faith is a little bit like
building a wood fire.
If you want to build a fire,
you first have to collect
some small pieces of wood.
And then, later, you need to have on hand
some larger pieces of wood
to keep the fire going.
Likewise, your baptism today
is the start of your fire of faith.
Now, it’s not easy to start a fire at times.
The wood may be wet.
The wind keeps blowing out your flame.
Likewise, it may not have been easy for you
to get the fire of your faith started.
You have taken the time and effort
to build your fire of faith.
Now you need to keep
that fire of faith burning.
Why?
Well, because our faith can become weak
unless we work to keep it strong.
On one occasion, Jesus said to some
of his disciples that they had little faith.
Let’s look at that at Matthew 17:20.
Matthew 17:20:
“He said to them:
‘Because of your little faith.
“‘For truly I say to you,
“‘if you have faith
the size of a mustard grain,
“‘you will say to this mountain,
“Move from here to there,”
and it will move,
and nothing will be impossible for you.’”
Jesus was letting them know
that they needed
to make their faith stronger.
Now, after a fire gets started,
it can often get very large and very hot.
But if there’s no wood added to the fire,
what happens?
It soon goes out
and turns to just cold ashes.
So in order for us to keep
our fire of faith burning,
we need to keep feeding it.
Likewise, your fire of faith
needs constant attention
to keep burning hot and bright.
Let’s consider three questions:
(1) How can you feed your fire of faith?
(2) What does it mean to exercise faith?
(3) How will Jehovah reward your faith?
Before we answer those questions, though,
we will talk to two baptized Witnesses
who have taken steps
to make their faith stronger.
First, let’s talk to Jouni Palmu.
Brother Palmu and his wife, Heli,
serve at Bethel in Finland.
And he has faithfully served
Jehovah for 60 years.
And I want you to note
what helped Brother Palmu
face a test of his faith
early in his pioneering.
Brother Palmu, can you recall a time
when you had little faith?
Yes, I can recall.
When I was 17, I moved
to serve as an auxiliary pioneer
with an isolated group far away from my home.
There I faced very religious people
who were convinced
that we Witnesses were wrong
and that I was badly misled.
They asked questions about scriptures
I never encountered in my former territory.
The people were very convincing
with their arguments,
and I felt confused and lost.
I asked myself,
‘Are there other questions too
that I don’t have answers to?’
And this started, little by little,
bothering me and tested my faith.
So there you were, young and isolated,
with all those questions.
What did you do to strengthen your faith?
I didn’t have bound volumes,
no Watchtower Library,
or those kinds of tools.
So I wrote a letter to my fleshly brothers
who at that time were in prison
because of refusing military service.
I knew that they had
all of our literature there,
and they were studying every day
the Bible, like scholars.
They saw my situation,
and they sent me a letter with answers
to all my questions.
I was so happy and thanked Jehovah.
It really strengthened my faith.
Jehovah used your brothers
in prison to help you.
So how do you think you benefited
from strengthening your faith?
This experience was decisive
—a hallmark to my whole spiritual life.
I understood the value of accurate knowledge,
and I started to collect a library of my own.
I still have my early library,
and to me, it is something very special.
This experience happened 56 years ago,
and since then,
I have not had any such doubts.
Jehovah has given us all
the answers we need to know.
And even
if there are questions we don’t have
answers to at the moment,
I have faith that they will be answered
by Jehovah in his due time.
Thank you, Brother Palmu.
Your experience really helps us to appreciate
the Bible’s answers
to life’s most complex questions.
Next, we can talk to Frankie Brown.
Brother Brown and his wife, Karen,
serve at Bethel in the United States.
And I want you to pay close attention
to what helped Brother Brown
to make the decision
to dedicate his life to Jehovah.
Brother Brown, can you recall a time
when you had little faith?
Until the age of 12,
I was raised by my grandmother,
who studied with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
This is how I was introduced to the truth,
and I studied off and on growing up.
At 17, like many young people,
I faced the decision of what
to do with my life after school.
Many around me just assumed
I’d go off to college and pursue a career.
However, from my study of the Bible,
I knew I had another choice to make
—to serve Jehovah.
This was a big decision for me.
At times, I had no idea what I wanted to do.
I was inexperienced and unsure
about whose advice to take
—the Bible’s
or that of well-meaning family and friends.
That’s quite a challenging decision
for you at that age to make.
What did you do to strengthen your faith?
I realized that I needed
to know Jehovah better
and what was involved in serving him.
So I resumed my Bible study
and attendance at Christian meetings.
I also began to do personal study.
One personal study project was Psalm 119.
This beautiful psalm
helped me to view Jehovah
as the loving Father I never had.
It also helped me to see the wisdom
of living in harmony
with the Bible’s standards.
For example, Psalm 119:99 says:
“I have more insight than all my teachers,
because I ponder over your reminders.”
Essentially, the psalmist was saying
that Jehovah was his Guidance Counselor.
Also, I’ve benefited from the good example
of the brothers
and sisters in my congregation.
They had already made the decision
to serve Jehovah, and from their life,
it was obvious they were truly happy
and had a meaningful life.
This convinced me that serving Jehovah
was the best way to use my life.
I thank Jehovah for their good example
and for their efforts to help me
at a time when I needed more faith.
Your personal study and help
from the brothers and sisters
in your congregation really helped you.
So how do you think you benefited
from strengthening your faith?
I got baptized, started pioneering,
and some years later was invited to Bethel.
From my youth onward, I have found security
and stability
in my relationship with Jehovah.
When I look back on my decision
to dedicate my life to Jehovah,
without a doubt that’s
the best decision I’ve ever made.
Whether young or old,
Jehovah will not let you down
when you need him the most.
Thank you, Brother Brown.
You made a good choice.
Let’s go back to our three questions.
Consider our first question:
How can you feed the fire of your faith?
Well, the Bible is our main source of fuel
to feed the fire of our faith.
To feed the fire of our faith,
we need to do two things.
We need to read God’s Word
and meditate on it.
Now, reading God’s Word
is like adding wood to our fire,
and meditation
is a lot like fanning the flames.
Let’s discuss these one at a time.
First, let’s use the example
of the psalmist at Psalm
chapter 1, verses 1-3.
Psalm 1:1-3:
“Happy is the man who does not walk
“according to the advice of the wicked
“and does not stand on the path of sinners
“and does not sit in the seat of scoffers.
“But his delight is in the law of Jehovah,
“and he reads His law in an undertone
“day and night.
“He will be like a tree planted
by streams of water,
“a tree that produces fruit in its season,
“the foliage of which does not wither.
And everything he does will succeed.”
Well, we want to be like
that man in this psalm.
“His delight is in the law of Jehovah.”
When we find delight, or pleasure,
in reading God’s Word,
it’s not like we have to read God’s Word,
but we want to read God’s Word.
He reads His law “day and night.”
Jehovah wants us to read his Word often.
Prayer is when we speak to Jehovah,
but reading the Bible
is when he speaks to us.
I’d like you to notice
the beautiful mental picture
that Isaiah gives us
of how Jehovah speaks to us
at Isaiah 30:21.
Isaiah 30:21:
“And your own ears will hear a word
behind you
“saying, ‘This is the way.
“Walk in it,’ in case you
should go to the right
or in case you should go to the left.”
Well, why do we hear Jehovah’s voice
behind us instead of in front of us?
Well, for one thing,
Jehovah’s words in the Bible
were written many years ago or, we could say,
in a time in the past—behind us.
But there’s another way
to visualize this verse.
Maybe you’ve been with a group
with some small children,
and you’re walking somewhere.
Where often are the children?
They’re out in front running ahead,
even if they don’t really know
where they’re going.
And what do the parents behind have to do?
Well, they have to call to them and say:
“No, no, no, not that way!
We’re going to the left here.”
And the children run back,
and that’s the direction that they go in.
Surely, we want to listen carefully
for Jehovah’s voice behind us, helping us
to make the right decisions.
Try to schedule Bible reading
as part of your daily routine.
As a suggestion, you can use the schedule
for Bible reading that’s found on jw.org.
To find it, type “schedule for Bible reading”
in the search field at the top right.
If you read just three
to five chapters every day,
you can complete
the entire Bible in just one year.
But simply reading God’s Word is not enough.
You need to meditate on what you are reading.
Well, why should you meditate
on what you read in God’s Word?
Well, it’s because knowing
what the right thing to do is
and doing it are not the same.
Meditation is the process
of converting knowledge—that is, what we know
into wise decisions and actions.
The Bible often associates
meditation with the heart.
Now, why is that?
Because meditation can convert knowledge
—that is, what we know into feelings.
And it is those feelings that drive
our actions and decisions.
We could kind of think
of meditation like a bridge.
On this side of the river, we have knowing
what the right thing to do is,
and on this side, we have actually doing it.
Meditation is the bridge
that closes the gap
between knowing and doing.
And if we find ourselves always
kind of knowing what the right thing to do is
but not actually doing it,
meditation is the bridge to help us
close that gap between knowing and doing.
Well, how can you meditate on God’s Word?
Well, after reading a portion of the Bible
or one of our publications,
take a few moments to think deeply
about what you have read.
Ask yourself:
‘What do I learn about Jehovah
when I read this account?
‘How does this account
make me feel about Jehovah?
‘How can I apply this in my life?
Or how can I use this to help others?’
So let’s review our first question:
How can you feed the fire of your faith?
Read and meditate on God’s Word each day.
Let’s look at our second question:
What does it mean to exercise faith?
Well, Jesus told us that more was required
than just believing in him.
Let’s read John 3:16
to see the emphasis that Jesus put
on exercising faith.
John 3:16:
“For God loved the world so much
“that he gave his only-begotten Son,
“so that everyone exercising faith in him
might not be destroyed
but have everlasting life.”
So, then, what does it mean
to exercise faith?
A study note on this verse explains:
“‘To exercise faith’ includes the idea
“of demonstrating
one’s strong beliefs or faith
[by obeying God].”
Abraham was a powerful example
of proving his faith by obedience.
Let’s look at a very wonderful description
of Abraham’s faith
at James 2:21-23.
James 2:21-23:
“Was not Abraham our father
declared righteous by works
“after he offered up
Isaac his son on the altar?
“You see that his faith was active
“along with his works and his faith
“was perfected by his works,
“and the scripture was fulfilled that says:
“‘Abraham put faith in Jehovah,
“and it was counted to him as righteousness,’
and he came to be called Jehovah’s friend.”
When we read and we meditate
on the account of Abraham,
we can feel the emotions
that he must have felt
in being asked to offer up his son Isaac,
the only son that he and Sarah had.
How could Abraham
make such a very difficult decision?
Well, long before this,
Abraham had made a decision
that he would obey Jehovah
and serve him in everything.
And that decision years before
to obey Jehovah in all things
helped Abraham to make
all the other decisions
in life clear on what he should do.
He did not always have to consider,
‘Should I do what Jehovah asks or not?’
As difficult a request
as it was to offer up his son,
Abraham did not delay
and took action immediately
to obey Jehovah’s request.
Now, by your baptism today,
you’re telling everyone
that you have dedicated your life to Jehovah
—to serve and obey him
for the rest of your life.
Now let’s consider three scriptures
and see how you can show your faith
by your actions.
Once we read each scripture,
we’ll consider how each scripture
is part of your dedication promise
and how you can show your faith in action.
Our first scripture is Hebrews 10:25.
Hebrews 10:25 says:
“Not forsaking our meeting together,
as some have the custom,
“but encouraging one another,
“and all the more so
as you see the day drawing near.”
Your dedication promise:
“I will attend all meetings,
assemblies, and conventions.”
Well, how do you show that
by faith in action?
Well, you really need a job,
but you say no to a job
that would mean that you
would regularly miss meetings.
You don’t have to decide,
‘Should I go to meetings or not?’
You’ve already made that decision
when you dedicated yourself to Jehovah.
Our second scripture is Romans 10:10.
Romans 10:10:
“For with the heart
one exercises faith for righteousness,
“but with the mouth
one makes public declaration for salvation.”
So your dedication promise:
“I want everyone to know about Jehovah.”
Your faith in action?
Well, going to bed early
so that you can get up
for field service the next morning,
auxiliary pioneering when you can,
scheduling field service first
and then other activities later in the day,
or adapting to different forms
of the ministry,
like telephone witnessing or letter writing.
Our third scripture is Mark 11:24.
Mark 11:24:
“This is why I tell you,
all the things you pray and ask for,
“have faith that you have received them,
and you will have them.”
Well, your dedication promise:
“I will constantly seek
Jehovah’s direction in prayer.”
Your faith in action?
When you’re tempted
to play a violent video game,
you reject that game and play something else.
When faced with a serious illness,
you pray for calm and wisdom
to make good decisions.
When you feel yourself
getting angry with someone,
you pray for self-control.
Now, we could use many more scriptures,
and we could give you many more examples
of how you can exercise
and show your faith by your actions.
The point is that you baptismal candidates
have dedicated your life
to Jehovah and to do his will.
This one decision to dedicate your life
and to live by his standards
sets the spiritual and moral foundation
for all the decisions you will make
from this day forward.
So let’s review our second question:
What does it mean to exercise faith?
We show our faith by our obedience to God.
Now let’s go to our third question:
How will Jehovah reward your faith?
Jehovah loves his faithful worshippers.
He wants the best for us,
and he wants us to be happy.
Jehovah sees every time you
do something to demonstrate your faith
—to show faith in action,
to be obedient to him.
Now, some feel that God, or Jehovah,
is always watching out
for the bad things that they do,
maybe keeping a ledger,
keeping track, of all these
bad things that a person does.
But Jehovah is not doing that.
He’s actually looking for the good
and rejoicing in the good that we are doing.
We could kind of illustrate it by the way
that many of us are taking
so many pictures these days.
We all have phones, cameras.
We’re taking lots of pictures.
And maybe you’ve noticed that at one point,
you take a picture of one of your friends
and they have kind
of a funny look on their face
or they are in the middle
of eating something.
If you show your friend that picture,
what do they often say?
“Could you please delete that?”
That’s not the picture
they want you to show to other people,
and that’s not the picture
you want to show of them.
Now I want you to imagine for a moment
that Jehovah has
a digital photo album of you.
Which pictures do you think
he’s keeping there?
the ones where we made serious mistakes?
the ones where we did something dumb?
No.
Based on your repentance
and the ransom sacrifice, those are deleted.
They’re gone.
He has in his photo album of you
the beautiful pictures
—the beautiful moments
that he’s proud of when
you showed your faith in action.
Jehovah wants to reward your faith.
At Hebrews 11:6,
we can see how Jehovah
feels about his servants
by what he says here about rewarding them.
Hebrews 11:6:
“Moreover, without faith
“it is impossible to please God well,
“for whoever approaches God
“must believe that he is
and that he becomes the rewarder
of those earnestly seeking him.”
So when listing
all these other examples of faith
there in chapter 11 of Hebrews,
the apostle Paul pauses for a moment
to remind us that Jehovah
“becomes the rewarder
of those earnestly seeking him.”
Now, when you take the time
and effort to build a fire,
what reward do you get in return?
Well, you get the warmth
and light of that fire.
You can keep yourself
and others warm by the fire,
and a fire gives off a beautiful light
that can be very welcome on a dark night.
The sounds of a crackling fire
can make us feel safe and happy.
How will Jehovah reward
his faithful worshippers
for their fire of faith?
Well, ultimately, He will reward us
with everlasting life.
During his ministry,
Jesus repeatedly promised
that his faithful servants
would get everlasting life.
Just as Jehovah provided
the rewards of a wood fire,
he also provides many gifts
that come when we build
and feed our fire of faith.
Consider some of the rewards
that Jehovah gives us now.
The reward of his Word, the Bible,
gives us the best advice for life.
It lights our way
in a spiritually dark world.
The reward of the ministry
is the most satisfying work that we can do.
The reward of holy spirit
is a powerful helper in times of trials.
Remember, you are never alone.
And the reward of our loving group
of brothers and sisters around the world
is a source of great warmth and comfort.
In conclusion,
let’s review our three questions:
(1) How can you feed your fire of faith?
Read and meditate on God’s Word each day.
(2) What does it mean to exercise faith?
We show our faith by our obedience to God.
(3) How will Jehovah reward your faith?
Everlasting life.
Please take note of this day.
Remember it; write it down.
Each time you hear
a baptism talk in the future,
take that opportunity
to reflect on your baptism
and the many blessings that you have received
because of the decision that you made
to dedicate your life to Jehovah.
Jehovah wants you to be happy
and to enjoy life.
All eight and a half million plus
of your brothers and sisters
who are watching this program
are with you in heart and mind,
and we want you to be happy.
Keep clear in mind, though,
that happiness is not something
that you can buy for yourself
or get for yourself,
and you can’t get it by loving yourself.
Just like warmth and light
are by-products of a wood fire,
so too happiness is a by-product of faith
and love for others and for Jehovah.
We could say that happiness
is the warmth and glow from love’s fire.
The world will tell you:
“You can follow your dreams.
You can be anything you want to be.”
But it is far better
to let Jehovah dream for you.
Your life serving Jehovah
can be far greater than anything
you could dream up for yourself.
Please, from this day forward,
be determined to keep feeding
and exercising your faith.
Thank you, Brother Ekrann.
Again this year,
the circumstances for baptism
will vary in each location.
Be assured that your elders
have made suitable provisions
in accord with local circumstances
for candidates to be baptized
after the conclusion of this session.
And now let’s sing together song number 79,
“Teach Them to Stand Firm.”
After the song,
you may have the prayer offered
from your own location.
Again, that’s song number 79.